---
layout: post
title: Data Science and AI
---
For the majority of this past year, I’ve had my head down consulting for a small, big data startup in Shoreditch. Whilst there’s been some web development, my main focus has been helping them make the most of their raw data: I’ve been starting to call myself a data scientist. There’s still lots of stuff to learn but there are a few lessons I’ve been able to bring in from my AI past that I think have been valuable and might be worth sharing. I’ve been finding that Data Science is a lot like AI, at least in the way I’ve been approaching it.

The approach I've taken has been to put the data firmly before the algorithm. The data is not there to feed your algorithms: your algorithms are for giving you a handle on the data. It’s noisy, messy and there’s a lot of it. It’s natural to shy away from it and focus on plugging it into clean and elegant algorithms. However, if you only have a shallow intuition of what the data represents then you will be lucky to extract much of its potential value and wielding it, regardless of how much computational power you have behind you. You have to go native and start conversing with the data.

Questions return answers which provoke better questions for more revealing insights in a learning spiral. Your exploration lets you map the quirks, blind-spots and rich seams. You also surface any gaps, biases and systematic errors in the sources which could severely limit or weaken what you could achieve with the data. Visualisation is key here, highlighting features you didn’t know existed. Once you have cleared the ground and laid the foundations, you naturally start asking more complex questions that can only be answered by complex analysis. This is the second challenge: to extend your understanding without opening gaps in it.

Take tentative steps here. It’s crucial to ensure you continue to understand your algorithm as you extend it. Avoid sexy black boxes. There’s a huge temptation to pull an implementation of your favourite / latest algorithm off the shelf with hopes of an easy win. More often than not, if that result doesn’t quite materialise and you find yourself either twiddling knobs or working backwards to trace why. Think hypotheses rather than goals, so even if an algorithmic extension doesn't have the outcome you expect, you learn more than another way that didn’t work’. This is putting the science in data science.

For my work, I’ve found the business value has been almost a byproduct of this incremental process of learning about, refining and representing the data. While you are doing this, you are building intelligence into the system - with yourself as a part of it. The insights I’ve gained can be easily translated into business offerings, since I understand the data and have already made the insights accessible.

The end product is not Artificial Intelligence but Augmented Intelligence. I’ve extended and externalised my knowledge of a domain - structuring and activating it the process - in such a way that someone else could pick it up as a tool and apply it. This makes the link between Data Science and Artificial Intelligence: The most successful AI/ML systems have always been primed with lots of domain knowledge encoded in a way that allows it to be applied effectively. Specialists have a tendency of beating generalists, especially on home ground.